[ Music ]
>> Lisa Garr: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
Would you like to create
more energy, cleanse toxins,
correct your digestion, or
concur infection all at once?
Well, it all starts with
your digestive system.
Even 30 different brain
chemicals are manufactured
in the gut.
So would you like to learn how
to restore your inner ecosystem
so that you can restore
your health and vitality?
Joining me is Donna Gates,
founder of the Body Ecology
Diet, used by hundreds
of thousands of people
worldwide for the past 25 years.
Welcome to the show.
Thank you for joining me.
>> Donna Gates: Thank you.
I'm thrilled to be here.
>> Lisa Garr: So how
did you get started
in the whole health arena?
>> Donna Gates: Well, I
would like many people
that step into this world.
Not well. In from the
beginning of my life,
I really wasn't feeling good.
Digestive problems.
No energy.
By the time I was a teenager,
between the toxins that,
you know, form in your body
and then your hormone changes,
my skin broke out pretty badly
and my mother not wanting it
to scar, took me to a
well-intentioned dermatologist
who put me on antibiotics and -
>> Lisa Garr: Wow.
>> Donna Gates: The birth
control pill was another
treatment and I was on
those for a long, long time
and it totally - from there,
I really went downhill.
I developed a condition that
I always teach people about,
but I didn't know I had this
condition for many, many -
a couple more decades really.
>> Lisa Garr: Which was?
>> Donna Gates: Candidiasis,
yeah.
>> Lisa Garr: Candidiasis.
We, the common people,
we all say "candita,"
but in the medical world
it's called "candida."
How does that manifest
in the body?
How would one know that
they have an overgrowth
of candida in the body?
>> Donna Gates: Well, it
depends on where it's located.
For example, if it's in your
gut, you can all have kinds
of inflammation, even
Crohn's and colitis or just -
>> Lisa Garr: Allergies?
>> Donna Gates: Allergies
for sure.
It just completely disrupts
the environment of the gut
because it's taking over.
Pathogens are in your
gut, basically, and then,
if it's in your - a
certain cavity in your body,
like your sinuses, your ear
canal, the vagina, the lungs.
Even the lungs.
It will cause infection
in those lungs
and so problems in that area.
Like you'll have constant
sinus infections all the time
that antibiotics don't treat.
If it's systemic, which
is really the serious,
the worst place, the
symptoms are everywhere.
And because these are
affecting your brain,
many of those systems
are brain-related.
Depression, moodiness,
cravings for sugar,
again, hormone imbalances.
It's affecting every single
system in the body, so -
>> Lisa Garr: And,
as you told me,
there are over 30
different brain chemicals
that are produced in the gut.
>> Donna Gates: The same brain
chemicals or neurotransmitters
that are made in the brain
for the brain are made
in the gut for the body.
Like serotonin, for example.
>> Lisa Garr: Dopamine,
all those great things
that make you feel good.
>> Donna Gates: All of
those that - like GABA.
We're anxious all the time.
Have anxiety.
>> Lisa Garr: So this
is actually a slide
that the candida yeast looks
like in the body,
which is fascinating.
So it looks like little
flowers basically.
>> Donna Gates: Yeah, that's
the interesting thing about it.
If you look at a picture of
it, you think, "Oh, lovely."
[Multiple speakers] And
you don't realize at all
that it's one of the most
dangerous infections you could
ever have in your body.
>> Lisa Garr: And men and
women alike get this overgrowth
in their body and have a
potential to get it, right?
>> Donna Gates: Sadly,
for decades now,
babies are born with it.
>> Lisa Garr: Why?
>> Donna Gates: Well, because
a woman has it in her body.
When she becomes pregnant,
her hormones go up.
They're supposed to;
progesterone, estrogen.
Glucose goes up.
That's important
for a healthy brain.
But all those hormones
and the glucose elevating
like that feels the yeast
that she has in her body.
So she has an acute - an acute
infection during the pregnancy
and when women have
infections like that,
they give it to their child.
>> Lisa Garr: Through the blood.
>> Donna Gates: So our
babies now are being born
with this infection and it's
very, very important to know
that because you can do
something right away.
>> Lisa Garr: Now,
is a certain amount
of yeast normal in the body?
Is a small amount of
yeast normal in the body?
>> Donna Gates: Yeah,
yeast is in the body,
but it's in a totally
different harmless form.
And the type of yeast infection
that we're talking about,
the yeast has become
pathogenic and very dangerous.
You know, very, you
know, opportunistic,
controlling things, manipulates
everything for its own survival.
>> Lisa Garr: Now, how do
you get yeast in the body?
I mean, do you get it by
eating bread or brewer's yeast?
Or is that a myth?
>> Donna Gates: See, I thought a
long time ago, and everyone did,
that it comes from when
you take antibiotics
and birth control pills.
I know that triggered it for me.
>> Lisa Garr: Why?
>> Donna Gates: Because - well,
the birth control pills alter
your hormones tremendously.
And, you know, they totally
change your estrogen.
Estrogen feeds the yeast
and makes them grow.
The antibiotics destroy all
the good bacteria in your gut.
Then you lose your immune system
and then the yeast, you know,
change because they're
there by themselves now
and they grow tentacles, they
burrow into the mucosal lining,
and they move through the body.
So they create so - and
they secrete toxins.
Dangerous, dangerous
toxins all the time.
You know, all of that is
disrupting the endocrine system,
the brain, everything.
So, you know, but the
other thing is sugar.
You know, we have
a high sugar diet
and that kills the good
bacteria in your gut.
It lets the yeast grow and
it keeps you very acidic,
which is exactly what they
thrive in is an acidotic body.
Stress does the same thing,
and that's just a recipe
for our life today.
Sugar, lots of carbs
in our diet, stress,
drugs like antibiotics.
>> Lisa Garr: And so all
of that feeds the yeast.
>> Donna Gates: It creates an
environment that creates them.
You know, takes them from
the bad form to the good -
from the good form
to the bad form,
and it creates an environment
to allow them to grow and thrive
and take over your body.
So -
>> Lisa Garr: Okay.
According to the slide, if
you have Crohn's Disease,
then that's usually a system of
overgrowth of yeast in the body.
Is that right?
>> Donna Gates: Well, there
it's literally an infection
in your gut and it can
be a mild infection.
And, also, don't forget that
the yeast are interacting
with their environment,
which is our gut,
and the food we're
putting into it.
So they're altering even the
food that's going into our gut.
Like, for example,
saturated fat.
I mean, you've got
pathogenic bacteria in your gut
and you're eating saturated fat,
which is a huge part
of our diet.
It causes tremendous
inflammation in the gut.
Now when inflammation
is in the gut,
it can go on to become more
severe and become, you know,
become Crohn's and colitis and
that's a very common - I mean,
we even have babies being born
with colitis and all today,
sadly enough, because their
little intestines are getting
enflamed in the womb.
>> Lisa Garr: It's a
lifelong struggle for people
and there's not a lot of
solutions around it other
than fixing the symptoms
of the Crohn's and colitis
and those types of
digestive disorders.
>> Donna Gates: Well, the
biggest problem I see is
that even though
your best doctors,
your functional medicine
doctors,
are very aware of candidiasis.
They know it exists,
but their fix
for it is usually an antifungal
drug, which doesn't take care
of the problem at all.
Diet's the most important thing
and change to your lifestyle
so you bring the
stress level down.
That's important, too.
But they really don't
get this condition.
Very, very few people do.
And then the other thing is -
so your doctor's not
going to help you.
>> Lisa Garr: [Multiple
speakers] But, now,
why don't they get it?
Because it's more of a
root cause of something?
It's -
>> Donna Gates: Well,
it's vague.
You know, the symptoms - you
come in and you say, "Well,
I'm really tired
and I'm depressed."
You think depression, "Oh,
you probably need
an antifungal drug."
Especially if it's not a
functional medicine doctor.
It's a traditional rank and
file doctor who's trained
in medical school and knows
all the drugs and everything,
but doesn't really know
the body that well.
So those - you don't want to go
to those type of
doctors for sure.
They don't know anything because
they've only been trained
to give you a drug.
But -
>> Lisa Garr: Well, they've been
trained to fix the symptoms,
but the root cause
is more systemic.
>> Donna Gates: Yeah, that's
what you always want to do.
It's like, "Where
did this come from?
Why do I have this symptom?"
And then something
else will show up and,
"Well, why do I have that?"
And you always go back and back
and back to the root cause.
And I've always done that.
>> Lisa Garr: Well, these
mysterious illnesses
that are called "incurables,"
like thyroid disease or Crohn's
and colitis and those types
of diseases, are they linked
to yeast infections in the body?
>> Donna Gates: You know,
there's not a single condition -
cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, you name it,
hormone imbalances, obesity -
there's not a single
condition, cancer especially -
>> Lisa Garr: Wow.
>> Donna Gates: That
doesn't have -
that person has a yeast
infection in their body
and you have to treat
the yeast infection.
Let's say you have cancer
and you start taking drugs,
chemotherapy, your yeast
infection's going to get worse
and very often the
person with cancer dies
of the yeast infection.
Now they had cancer so the death
certificate will say "cancer,"
but the real cause was
the fungal infection,
the fungal overgrowth
in their body
that becomes very
acute with the drugs.
>> Lisa Garr: Alright,
so now how are yeast
and thyroid conditions related?
>> Donna Gates: Well, a lot
of people have thyroid
conditions today
and they don't realize the
thyroid can have an infection
in it.
So anytime the thyroid
has toxins in it,
if it has infections attacking
it like a viral infection,
but also very commonly a
yeast infection attacking
and sending poisons into the
thyroid, you will test positive
for having thyroid antibodies
and that's called Hashimoto's.
And that's very common.
>> Lisa Garr: Most
common in women, though.
Do you notice that?
>> Donna Gates: It is.
>> Lisa Garr: Why is that?
>> Donna Gates: Well,
I think in a woman,
her whole endocrine system is
much, much more complicated
and sensitive than
in a man's body.
>> Lisa Garr: [Multiple
speakers]
Because of the hormonal balance.
>> Donna Gates: Especially young
men today are - and babies.
We even have babies that are
born with thyroid problems.
>> Lisa Garr: Really?
>> Donna Gates: Very commonly.
>> Lisa Garr: Because of
the mother's antibodies?
>> Donna Gates: Well, I think
it's a combination of the toxins
that they're inheriting, bad
diet during the pregnancy.
Not just that, before the
pregnancy the woman didn't
eat well.
And the babies today
are just not strong
and healthy like they should be.
It's one of my biggest concerns
in the whole wide
world is the health
of this particular
generation of children.
>> Lisa Garr: Yeah,
you talk about it a lot
and you see a lot of it.
>> Donna Gates: Yeah,
because somebody needs to.
It's like, "What's wrong?"
Can't people wake up, you know?
Our children are their future
and if we don't have
healthy children,
there is no future for us.
I cant believe how
people are not getting it,
you know, really.
>> Lisa Garr: I saw a
whole news piece on this
that you were a large
part of on your website
about how diet has
changed the face of autism
in so many different
children that you've worked
with specifically by
changing their diet.
>> Donna Gates: Oh,
it's been critical.
Years ago, about 10 or 11 years
ago, I stepped into the world
of autism and everybody was
completely focused on mercury.
Like the kids, you know, got
mercury in their vaccine.
And I though, "I don't know.
I'm seeing a lot of other
stuff here, you know."
Everybody knew they did
have yeast infections.
They had, you know, gut
problems, digestive disorders,
lots of heavy metals
in their body, yes,
but so do a lot of children.
A lot of children who aren't
autistic have heavy metals
in their body, too.
What was different?
And I though, "You know, these
kids - all these conditions
that these kids have, we
deal with that in adults."
So I was very fortunate to start
attracting of course, as we do,
mothers whose children
had autism.
So I said, "Now, here's
what I think you should do."
And the kids started
getting well.
So at about two years
of these moms going
into the doctors saying,
"Look, he's talking now.
He's normal now."
Or whatever.
The doctors started
moving off their -
looking off in the
wrong direction
and realizing how
really important diet is.
And not just diet.
It's about the gut.
>> Lisa Garr: The specific diet.
>> Donna Gates: Because
health begins in the gut.
Disease begins there.
You got to start there.
Fix the gut first.
>> Lisa Garr: And now cortisol
production also is affected
by yeast.
What is the role of
cortisol in the body?
>> Donna Gates: Well, it's
a stress hormone that -
pretty, very damaging.
It very - it does
affect all the hormones.
It alters them completely.
But the thyroid - the thyroid
makes a hormone called T-4,
but that isn't active
until it becomes T-3.
And T-3 goes into every single
cell in the body and gives
that cell energy
all over the body.
So we have to have the T-3.
What happens is, if
you have cortisol,
T-4 wont convert to T-3.
If you have a yeast
infection in your body,
one of the many dangerous toxins
that they use for secreting,
acetaldehyde also stops
the T-4 from becoming T-3.
So we have no energy.
Now, this is advantageous
to the yeast
because low thyroid
means low energy.
It also means you're cold
a lot, cold hands and feet.
The yeast grow very well in the
body of somebody who's cold.
>> Lisa Garr: Really?
>> Donna Gates: Yeah, yeah.
If you were, like, a chameleon
or a lizard or a bat that goes
to sleep and gets cold in the
wintertime and you get infected
by a yeast infection, that's it.
A frog. That's where
millions and millions
of our frogs have gone.
They were attacked by -
>> Lisa Garr: Funguses
and yeast.
>> Donna Gates: Same
thing with other - bats.
We're losing our bats here
in America because they go
to sleep, they get attacked
by a fungus, and they're gone.
So at least humans
are warm-blooded,
but not when the
thyroid goes down.
So you're more of a perfect
host for the yeast to live in.
>> Lisa Garr: Okay, so you
mentioned that the main solution
on how to attack these
types of symptoms
in the body is going
to be through diet.
One of the things is
mainly through diet.
Explain what you mean by that.
>> Donna Gates: Well, the
diet has to be sugar-free.
And a lot of people think
they're eating healthy foots
like carrot juice and beet
juice, rice, brown rice.
They think they're eating
foods that are good for them,
but those foods have too much
sugar and they're feeding yeast.
So they're - you've got to be
on a totally sugar-free diet.
So in the Body Ecology Diet,
we've identified all the sources
of sugar and identified
all the safe foods to eat -
and there's a lot
of delicious foods.
It's not like you'll lose
everything that you eat
and there's nothing left at all.
The diet - I always
forget to tell people,
it's a super healthy diet.
It happens to be
a delicious diet.
>> Lisa Garr: But
it's more than a diet.
It's a lifestyle.
I mean, it really is.
>> Donna Gates: Well, it is.
I always say it's a system
of health and healing.
You know, there's
Chinese medicine
and there's Ayurvedic medicine
and those are fantastic systems.
The only thing is that our
bodies are really different
today and they didn't
really address -
like Chinese medicines
are excellent
for addressing adrenaline
fatigue and hormone imbalances.
That's - they're
the best at that.
But I've brought a lot
of that into Body Ecology
to create a new system of
health and healing that we need
because we have really
different bodies today
than people had 100
or 1,000 years ago.
>> Lisa Garr: That -
well, that's interesting
because what you've done
with this is you've
made it a way of life.
Or you've made it so that
people can be supported.
They can talk to people in
your community and other people
in the community
about Body Ecology.
You have been teaching
this system for 25 years.
>> Donna Gates: Yeah,
the five - very actively.
Like, the first five, I was
still teaching, learning,
teaching, learning
kind of thing,
putting something together.
But for 20 years we've been
out there and, you know,
it's interesting because I -
my, you know, way is to be ahead
of the pack, sort
of, considerably.
So, you know, when
I brought stevia in,
no one knew what stevia is.
I brought back coconut evil
and everybody thought
that was an evil fat.
You know, and so - but we
needed those foods and I began
to bring back the
things we needed
and teach these new concepts
about fermented foods
and nobody's ready for it yet.
So it takes five years or
so and, all of a sudden,
coconut oil is everywhere.
Stevia, everyone's using it.
>> Lisa Garr: [Multiple
speakers] Yes,
you've been quite a pioneer.
>> Donna Gates: A long time.
And it's kind of exciting
because the other day I was
on Amazon and I test - you
know, I typed in all the books
on fermented foods, cultured
vegetables, and so on.
I ordered at least 15
of them because I wanted
to check them all out.
And I was amazed at how many
books - they're all, you know,
in the last two years or so.
But, so, that was like
a confirmation to me
that we're going in
the right direction
and people are getting it.
>> Lisa Garr: Yes, yes.
Well, you've been a pioneer
in the health field
for a long time.
We're going to take a
little bit of a look
at the Body Ecology
system through this video.
Take a look.
>> Donna Gates, creator of
Body Ecology, a natural system
of health and healing.
It helped you lose
weight, look younger,
and build your immune system
by improving the way you eat.
Body Ecology grew out
of years of research,
observation, and experience.
Today we have the support
and collaboration of doctors
and nutritionists
from around the world.
Body Ecology was created by
studying modern medicine,
ancient Chinese medicine,
and naturopathy.
These ancient systems of healing
need to be modified in a way
that will work for
your body today.
For example, 100 years ago you
wouldn't have had the toxins
in your bodies that
you have today.
All of these ancient systems
have been incorporated
and refined into our
new bio-optimal approach
to nutrition.
[ Music ]
Body Ecology allows your body to
operate the way it was designed
to function naturally.
A bio-optimal diet like ours
grows your immune system,
it protects you against diseases
such as cancer and diabetes,
everything down to
the common cold.
It helps you stay
and look younger.
Increases your mental
awareness, gives you energy,
and helps you achieve your
ultimate fat-to-muscle ratio.
We do this simply with
food as the foundation
for all this wellness.
It's endless what
starts to happen
when your body is in balance.
I decided years ago, if I
were going to create a system
of health and healing, it would
have a diet that tasted great,
and the Body Ecology
Diet really does.
But remember, we're
much more than a diet.
We're really a way of life.
You have the most amazing
cutting edge information.
If you are struggling with
weight loss, cancer, autism,
diabetes, or you want to
prevent and reverse aging,
visit our website
bodyecology.com.
And thank you for watching.
[ Music ]
>> Lisa Garr: Okay, so
we've talked a little bit
about the diet being
sugar-free, first of all,
and what are the
other aspects of it?
>> Donna Gates: Well,
it's gluten-free, too,
and that's a huge
issue for people today.
Many people, whether
they realize it or not,
are reacting to gluten.
They may be completely
asymptomatic,
which means they don't
have any obvious signs,
but they are reacting to it.
Gluten and sugar are two foods
that, if you eliminate them
from your diet, your health
will improve enormously,
whether they have yeast or not.
No matter what you have,
you've got to get rid
of sugar and gluten.
Something I discovered recently
by connecting different dots
of research is that
the gluten - you know,
so the yeast secrete
toxins all the time.
And these toxins just
slam the immune system.
That's why the yeast are
so difficult to get rid of,
because you need
your immune system
to overcome the yeast infection.
But now the yeast are great at
producing these dangerous toxins
that slam the immune system,
so you don't have one really.
And then the immune
system - you eat gluten
and the immune system, which
is yeastified in yeast,
sees the gluten and says, "Oh,
looks like the same enemy,"
because yeast and
gluten look alike.
They're both proteins
that look alike.
And then the immune
system attacks the yeast
and you have an autoimmune
reaction to the gluten.
It also enflames the gut
and the kind of gluten
that we're eating today is
not like the gluten man used
to have before the '50s.
It's just truly a food you want
to eliminate from your diet
and only be better for it.
>> Lisa Garr: So it's a protein.
Yeast is a protein and
gluten is a protein.
So the yeast feeds off of
the gluten in order to grow.
Is that what you're saying?
>> Donna Gates: Well, it feeds
it - usually gluten comes
in something, like a
piece of bread, let's say.
It feeds off the
sugar in the bread,
but what it sees is the
gluten is another enemy.
In other words, it's used to
fight - the immune system's used
to fighting really hard to
bring the yeast under control.
And then it sees this gluten,
which looks like more
yeast, and it attacks that.
So you're reacting to
this protein that's come
into your body.
Your immune system's
attacking it.
>> Lisa Garr: What about
something like corn,
that's also high in
sugar and a grain?
Does the yeast react to corn?
>> Donna Gates: Well,
the - no, not to corn.
>> Lisa Garr: Good,
something we can eat.
>> Donna Gates: Yeah,
corn is - yeah,
corn is pretty a good
choice except for it's just
so genetically modified today.
You've really got to
find organic corn.
>> Lisa Garr: Right,
that is hard to find.
Alright, so what is the
role of the cultured foods
and how does this help really
reduce candida and yeast growth
and stop it in its tracks?
>> Donna Gates: Well, I think
the best way to answer that,
if you don't mind a long
answer to your question,
when we're born nature
puts an inner ecosystem
in place in our gut.
It's really important and
no one ever knew about it.
Back like 20 years ago,
I started - I was allowed
to discover this information
and see how important it was
and put it all together and,
again, nobody was really ready
for it yet and there really
wasn't a term for it, you know.
And so I came up with this
term called the inner ecosystem
because we have this ecosystem
outside in the world, you know,
with birds eating
worms and all that.
You know, that whole ecosystem
that everybody's
always concerned
about because we're
disrupting that.
But we have an ecosystem in our
gut, too, of beneficial microbes
and it's set into - it
begins forming at birth.
In other words, when we slip
through the birth canal,
we're supposed to pick
up all this really healthy
bacteria from our mother.
We come out in the world, our
whole body is covered with it,
it gets down into
our digestive track -
which is actually still the
outside world, it just happens
to be in the middle of our body
- and we have that bacteria
on us and it begins to do
very, very important things.
And no one knew that.
They didn't realize how
important these bacteria are.
So to answer your question,
these bacteria, they're vital.
It's one of the hottest
areas of research right now,
taking the bacteria
and deciding,
"What does this one do?
What does this one do?"
Because there's thousands
and thousands.
Well, at least a
thousand species
of bacteria in and on us.
And it's so interesting because
you might have a completely
different little
ecosystem under this armpit
than you have under this one.
And completely different
bacteria in my gut and your gut.
So it's like a fingerprint.
We're all quite unique.
But they're important because
they make B vitamins for us
and they're vital for having
energy and for detoxifying.
>> Lisa Garr: Do cultured
foods make B vitamins for us?
>> Donna Gates: Well,
the bacteria do.
>> Lisa Garr: The bacteria does.
>> Donna Gates: The bacteria
are in the fermented foods,
which I'd like to
talk about next.
I'm sorry if I'm confusing you.
But the bacteria - you know,
if you understand what the
bacteria do, then you look
at the vegetables and other
things we teach people to make
that are fermented
and then you all
of a sudden appreciate
them because, you know,
we can't see the bacteria.
Very, very fortunately,
when our eyes were created,
we were given eyes that
can't see bacteria.
So that's good because
you look at a plant,
you look at another person, you
look at the walls or something,
and all we would
see is bacteria.
Like I couldn't even see you.
I would just this shape.
And I couldn't tell that
you had brown eyes and,
you know, beautiful smile.
I'd just see this
massive wiggly shapes.
And so, fortunately,
we can see color,
we can see each other;
it's a big deal.
And - but then the other side
of that is that when you look
at something fermented,
you don't realize there's a
whole lot of great bacteria
in there and, of course,
we know nothing about what
that bacteria's doing.
>> Lisa Garr: Well, in
the Western culture,
we are not as familiar with
fermented foods as we could be
and so you have really brought
and introduced the concept
into the Western
culture in a huge way.
But it's hard to wrap your
head around sometimes.
When I've tried to figure it out
- so I wanted you to bring them,
which these are beautiful.
You just did these
last night, right?
>> Donna Gates: Well,
this one I made last week
and it's ready to eat.
And this one I made
yesterday, so it needs a week
and then you can eat it.
>> Lisa Garr: So it
takes about a week for -
>> Donna Gates: A
week to ferment, yeah.
>> Lisa Garr: And
what does that mean?
>> Donna Gates: What does
it mean to ferment it?
Oh, okay. Now, they are
made from vegetables.
In this particular case, cabbage
and there's a pepper in there
and red pepper and
onions and so on.
In this green one,
I put in cucumber
and the sea vegetable
called wakame,
and lots of green cabbage.
Anyway, so they sit there and,
because these vegetables came
in from the garden,
they're actually coated
with bacteria that we can't see.
These bacteria are in a special
relationship with each other.
This is something so
important to understand.
Probiotics are hot and your
doctor and everybody else,
every article you read, will say
go get a probiotic, you know.
But the bacteria on -
these are way more powerful
than a probiotic because
this cabbage, for example,
is growing in the garden and
from a tiny seed bacteria begin
to grow on the, you
know, cabbage.
And then as the cabbage grew up,
these bacteria started changing
and growing and relating
to each other
and they form this amazing
symbiotic relationship that's
beyond anything human
beings can ever figure out.
So you bring the cabbage
in, you shred it up,
you pack it in a jar and wait
a week and start eating it,
you have this extraordinary
wisdom of nature and, well,
we're quite a ways from figuring
out why these work so well.
I mean, as I mentioned before,
they make these vitamins
and Vitamin K. These
bacteria keep the gut clean.
They have to live in
a clean environment.
So the whole entire
intestinal tract is kept clean.
If that's true, then
so is your liver,
so is every single cell
everywhere in your body,
and that is one of the secrets
to health and to longevity
and to growing old very slowly.
Because clean cells that
are well-nourished - also,
you eat these foods - so you're
going to eat them in your meal
and you're eating other things,
too, vegetables, fish, whatever,
now the bacteria are traveling
through your digestive tract
with that food, acting
upon it, breaking it down,
breaking down the proteins
into amino acids and fats
and fatty acids, and they're
pulling out the minerals
and holding onto
them so they can get
out into the cells
and everything.
They're just doing
all this great stuff.
And then you also have this
nice quiet digestive tract, too.
It's not all gassy and bloated
like when people
deal with that today.
And so -
>> Lisa Garr: It doesn't
reduce the acidity in the body?
In the digestive tract as well?
>> Donna Gates: Well, actually,
the food itself is acidic
in a healthy kind of way.
Lactic acid bacteria.
But they're - they're breaking
down the food, which
is essential.
I mean, why eat food
if you can't digest it?
It just becomes a toxin.
And then they're traveling
through your digestive tract,
keeping that inner world
always, if you're eating them
on a regular basis like I do,
they'll always keep
your gut clean.
Well, that shows up everywhere,
in your energy, in your skin,
you know, like your - I'm
66 now and I have tiny bits
of gray hair, like a few strands
here and there, and I expected
to turn gray sooner,
but it's not happening.
And, you know, because I
have minerals in my body.
When I go get tested
for nutrients,
I'm not ever lacking anything.
>> Lisa Garr: Wow,
absolutely huge.
>> Donna Gates: And
this is what I do.
I mean, I do the diet and
I do these fermented foods
and I believe in clonics.
You know, we teach about
that and, you know, so on.
But it works, I guess
is what I'm saying.
>> Lisa Garr: Now, you
take the cultured starter,
which is kind of important.
Tell me how that works in
the cultured food process.
>> Donna Gates: This is good.
I'm glad you mentioned that
because all those bacteria
and yeast and everything
from the garden - good yeast,
not bad ones, but good yeast -
are on that head
of cabbage, right.
Or carrots or garlic or onions,
whatever you're shredding up.
You pack them in the jar and
they've got bacteria, but,
if you really want to add extra
bacteria, which is what I teach,
I have people put in
this bacteria right here,
which is called plantarum.
And plantarum is like one
of those magical,
magical bacterias.
It does so many things, I
won't even go into that.
But one of the things that
plantarum does is if you have
to take an antibiotic,
and people will,
you know, from time to time.
And antibiotics, I used to
think they were really bad.
They told me it messed up
my body because I took them
for so long, but they've
also saved millions
of people's lives.
They're here to stay.
But they kill all the bacteria
in your gut unless you have a
lot of plantarum living there
and then they don't destroy
the plantarum so you can't get
that overgrowth of yeast
that then spreads
systemically through your body.
And it's a big deal.
And then they do
other things, too.
They're antiviral.
There's - in plants -
like, we're really big
on people eating a
lot of plant foods.
Eighty percent of our
diet is plant foods.
But plant foods - all foods have
a positive and negative side
to them, what I call
a front and back.
Plant foods have
poisons in them,
like oxalates, for example.
Well these guys are
oxalate eaters.
Plantarum's a great
oxalate eater.
>> Lisa Garr: So if you were
to just have a jar of cabbage
and you left it in
a jar for a week,
it would most likely mold unless
you put in the cultured starter.
Is that right?
>> Donna Gates: If
you do it right
and keep the air
out, it won't mold.
That's a good question, too.
People say they go to
the trouble, you know,
shredding the vegetables
and pack them into jars.
It's not that much trouble.
They make them, right, and it's
time to eat them and they think,
"Oh, my God, what
if they're spoiled
and I die from eating these?"
>> Lisa Garr: It
sat out on a counter
for a week [multiple speakers] -
>> Donna Gates: Yeah,
yeah, yeah.
It could be spoiled
and I could die.
We get calls like that.
So, fortunately, there's
lots more information
in YouTube videos so people
don't call so much anymore, but,
yes, if it's a beautiful bright
color, for sure it's fermented.
For sure.
>> Lisa Garr: If it - but if you
left a piece of fruit in a jar
for a week, it would
definitely -
>> Donna Gates: You
don't ferment fruit.
[Multiple speakers] Because,
like, grapes turn into wine.
Fruit turns into alcohol.
>> Lisa Garr: But it also grows
fungus because of the sugar.
>> Donna Gates: It does,
and here's the thing.
This is important to say, too.
There are different
types of fermentation.
There's wild fermentation,
so if you're making beer,
if you're making wine, if
you're making sourdough bread,
if you're making kombucha, which
everybody thinks is healthy
and it's not for maybe people -
not for anyone with candidiasis.
>> Lisa Garr: Oh,
because it's a fungus.
>> Donna Gates: Well,
what happens is those are all
examples of wild fermentation.
So that means the yeast from
the air are getting in there
and you're getting
that wild yeast.
That's another yeast that
when you get it in your body,
your immune system says
it's an enemy and it reacts.
And usually they
give you a lot -
like kombucha gives people
a lot of gas and bloating.
The type of fermentation
I'm talking
about is all the fermentation
where you've got a
specific bacteria
and your inoculating that food.
Another example is miso.
You know, in Japan, for example,
they inoculate the soybeans
with a bacteria that turn those
beans over the next three months
or six months or
sometimes even years.
They turn them into - they
ferment it and break it down
and totally turn it into a
different food that's now safe.
Soy is not safe, but
soy fermented is.
Natto is another -
popular among the Japanese
and I highly recommend
it for people.
If you're anywhere
near a Japanese market,
go buy some natto
because a spoonful
of natto everyday is
off the charts powerful.
>> Lisa Garr: What is it?
>> Donna Gates: Well, it's
another fermented soy bean
where this is a different
bacteria called natto bacillus.
Natto bacillus is so strong,
you can put a whole bunch of it
in an autoclave and sterilize
it for 15 minutes and open it up
and all that good
bacteria is left.
It's a very funny food
because if you beat it,
it starts to get these long
strands - strains, strands,
I guess you call them - and
that's actually a biofilm
and that's why you
can't destroy natto
because it's made
its own biofilm.
It's like surrounded itself
in this polysacroid wall
that an antibiotic can't
get in and kill it.
Nothing can kill it.
It's a great, great,
great bacteria.
>> Lisa Garr: So now, in terms
of the soy beans, though,
do you get a high
amount of estrogen?
When you culture it, does
it balance that out at all?
>> Donna Gates: No, it would
be a good food for women to eat
because it's a healthy
source of estrogen.
You know, that's
another whole show
because what's the
problem is that -
it's not that we're eating
the foods that make estrogen.
It's the wrong kind of estrogen
because different things happen
in your body, particular as
we age, when you eat wrong.
Hormones, like testosterone,
I'll just use that one.
Testosterone enzyme comes along
and acts on the testosterone
and turns it into a type
of estrogen called estrone.
That's the one that
causes cancer.
So it isn't that
estrogen is bad.
I want to clear that up because
there's so much misunderstanding
about the hormones and -
>> Lisa Garr: It's a
complicated system, yes.
>> Donna Gates: You
know, I thought so, too.
Like I was getting an advanced
certification in endocrinology
through [inaudible] right
now and I started, you know,
taking all these modules and
I was like, "Oh, my gosh,
I don't know if I'll
ever master this."
But after awhile you do.
It all starts clicking and
this probably seems complicated
to people, but if
you just do it.
You know, I try to
simplify it for people
and it is very simple.
We have a real simple chart
that people can follow
that shows you how simple it is.
But if you want to know
this, you know, like, again,
I sit in all these modules with
all this great research taught
by fantastic functional
medicine doctors
and all the time it validates
what I've been teaching
for years.
It's like the research
of today is saying,
"This is what you do."
So I'm grateful for that.
>> Lisa Garr: This
is how you get to it.
Alright, well we have a video of
Donna making the cultured foods
that you can just get an idea
of what it looks
like in the kitchen.
So take a look.
>> Donna Gates: Now, what we're
going to do is very, very noisy
and we've done some of this
ahead of time, but we're going
to go ahead and just put
in a little bit of cabbage.
I've already got some
shredded to save time here.
And if you're using
something like this,
you have to cut your
cabbage kind of small.
But in the Robot Coupe you can
put big chunks of cabbage in.
And just push it through
the food processor.
[Background noise]
What I've done is I put
in the blade beyond - it's
like a shredding blade,
so it's sitting up on a post
and there's a shredding
blade on the top.
You can get different
size shredding blades
and you can make your cultured
vegetables be as finely shredded
or a little bit coarser.
You know, people
are very opinionated
about their cultured
vegetables and some people
like them juicier, some
people like them drier,
some people like them finely
shredded or coarsely shredded,
but you can control
that yourself.
>> My son, my own son,
likes them chopped
so I don't even use
[multiple speakers] -
[ Background noise ]
[ Multiple speakers ]
>> Donna Gates: That's what
a mom will do for her child.
[ Background noise ]
But often times I'll use a
simple recipe of three heads
of green cabbage, three
bunches of keel, six carrots,
and then a lot of times
I'll put in red pepper.
Sometimes, because people -
some people like that
spicy salsa flavor,
you can add different peppers.
Like some of the peppers
are very, very hot and spicy
and some are much milder.
It's the seeds that you
have to watch out for.
Like if you put the
seeds in, they're going
to be really hot and spicy.
But there's a lot of fun, you
know, peppers on the market
and that's a good possibility.
We're not going to
do that today.
>> We should say that every
time you ferment something,
it really enhances the flavor
and so, if you are going
to add peppers, you
really don't need a lot.
A little goes a long way.
>> Donna Gates: That's true.
Another thing to talk about,
too, probably, is garlic.
Garlic is another one of those
vegetables, if you put it in,
a little bit will really
strongly flavor the whole -
flavor will dominate with the
garlic if you use too much.
Even two or three cloves
for three cabbage
heads would be plenty.
And I put the whole clove in.
But one thing about garlic
is it is an inhibiter
of the [inaudible]
microflora so it will slow
down the fermentation
process a little bit.
>> So what you're saying is
it will take longer to ferment
if you have garlic
in your batch?
>> Donna Gates: I just
don't think you'll end
up with a product that has
quite as much microflora in it.
>> And what we're going
for is a product with a lot
of good beneficial bacteria.
>> Well, garlic actually,
for me, makes it taste a lot,
too strong, and so I
really don't use garlic.
So I know garlic is very
healthy, but that's really good
to learn that you
don't really need it.
>> Donna Gates: No,
it's good, though.
I mean, it's good for you.
It really also - it's
going to change the flavor.
So we want - no matter
what you make,
it's going to be good for you.
So we want people to enjoy
their finished product
so they really do eat these.
They're very sour and we're
not used to the sour flavor.
We're used to having sweet
and salty in our country here,
but sour's a very important
flavor to introduce into a meal.
And when you have the sour
flavor, it stimulates digestion,
but it also dampens
your desire for sweets.
So you won't find
yourself overeating.
>> Lisa Garr: I have
been forever trying
to demystify cultured foods
because it makes so much sense
that they're so good for you,
but I don't know
how to make them.
So that helped a little bit.
And I came to your house one
day because I really wanted
to learn how to do
this, and it was easy.
So explain - yeah, so -
>> Donna Gates: Okay, just
think of three simple steps.
Step Number One,
you've got to shred
up whatever vegetables you
want and I have great recipes.
After all the years of making
some pretty crummy batches,
you know, that I -
I've really discovered
that simple is better.
>> Lisa Garr: And it has to be
organic because you don't want
to get all the chemicals.
>> Donna Gates: You know, it
should ideally be organic,
but here's another wonderful
thing about the bacteria.
They're master cleansers.
Like if you eat a piece of
salmon and you're worried
because it has a lot
of mercury in it and -
salmon isn't a high source
of mercury, but heavy metals
in our foods or chemicals
in our foods
because they've been sprayed,
that's one of the main
jobs of the bacteria.
They'll eat it up.
They'll get rid of it for you.
So if you can only afford a head
of cabbage - now, I have to say
that I went to the farmer's
market and I made nine jars
for - I made six - yeah, nine
jars for $9.00, $9.00 or $10.00.
>> Lisa Garr: Oh,
you're kidding.
>> Donna Gates: I bought
them at the farmer's market.
It's a lot more expensive
at whole foods,
but still it's extraordinary.
I always wish I could
go into neighborhoods
where people are not eating
well and they're always worried
that healthy is expensive.
This is not expensive.
It's amazing for the money.
>> Lisa Garr: Now, I asked
you once about red peppers
and green peppers and
so forth and those -
I tend to be allergic
to some nightshades.
But you said -
>> Donna Gates: It's
like fermenting changes
everything, you know.
It just improves everything.
Green peppers are left
- are picked immature
and red are left on the vine.
So if you're going
to pick a pepper,
pick a red or yellow pepper.
>> Lisa Garr: A pickled pepper.
>> Donna Gates: That's
exactly what I -
>> Lisa Garr: That's a
pickled pepper, isn't it?
>> Donna Gates: It
was a picked pepper.
Picked red.
But the thing is - I
wanted just to say,
because we got off the
subject, as we often do,
okay, three simple steps.
First, shred your cabbage.
Secondly, you want
to make a brine.
So you take your blender and
you put in some water and then,
what I've learned to do now -
this is the best, simplest way -
is I put in a couple apples
because they're sweet
and they love sugar.
So I put a couple of sweet
apples in there and blend those
up and then I'll put in our
starter, our plantarum starter,
because I want this to be
a super, super rich batch
with all these great - you know,
you don't have to do it, but -
>> Lisa Garr: You've done the
work for us with the starter.
>> Donna Gates: [Multiple
speakers] It really makes it
great if you would
put the starter in.
Okay, then I put in some - I
open up some of our minerals
because they love
minerals and, you know,
once upon a time our food
grew in mineral-rich soil
so I dump in some minerals.
And I put a small amount of
salt, like two teaspoons maybe,
and then I put in - we have
something called Eco Bloom
and I'll put a scoop
of that in there
because that feeds them also.
So you can tell it, but
our jars are very hearty,
super ready-to-go when they're -
>> Lisa Garr: [Multiple
speakers] Wow, a complete meal.
>> Donna Gates: Well,
they do have all kinds -
if you have a piece of
protein, like a piece of fish
or scrambled eggs or something,
and a scoop or two of these,
you've got a complete meal.
But I'm just explaining that
the way we make them is hearty
and you don't have to
make them that way.
But, okay, so Step Two is
you blend up this brine,
pour it into your
veggies that you shredded,
and Step Three is you
pack them in a jar.
And then when you get to the
top of the jar - you see,
you want them to be juicy,
so you put the brine in there
and you make enough brine so
that they're nice and juicy
because the juice
is great for you.
>> Lisa Garr: You
pack them down, right?
You push them down?
>> Donna Gates: Pack
them real tight
because you don't want any air.
And then at the very top,
we take a leaf of cabbage
or collared greens or something
and put that at the top.
We put on the lid, no air can
get in, and you're good to go.
Nature does the rest
of the work for you.
>> Lisa Garr: And it just -
and it goes through
the fermenting process.
Now what if it starts to bubble?
Or is there anything
to look out for?
>> Donna Gates: Sometimes
it might
because you might overfill
them and so, like on Day Two
or something, they're beginning
to bubble a little bit.
So just loosen the lid.
If you want to pour out
some of the juice, you can.
Tighten it back up again.
The juice, though - oh, my gosh,
the juice is very important.
We encourage our mothers to
eat this when they're pregnant
to get that good bacteria in
their gut, in the birth canal,
so the baby picks it up and
has a healthy inner ecosystem.
That's important for
when they're born.
But we give it to our babies.
We actually give the juice in
little dropper fulls to babies
when they're born to make sure
that they are digesting
their mother's milk
and they get this
healthy inner ecosystem
which will be their
immune system.
I keep -
>> Lisa Garr: I would think
[inaudible] for good, huh?
>> Donna Gates: Oh, it's the
beginning of your immune system.
Seventy-five percent of
your immune system is there
or not based on whether you
have these bacteria living,
all this community of
bacteria, living in your gut.
>> Lisa Garr: And
then the small amount
of the apple doesn't
ferment in -
>> Donna Gates: No, no.
For them, it's just now a
little bit of apple juice water
and they're eating that
sugar during the week
and growing more.
If they have more food,
more of them won't grow.
It's all about food competition.
>> Lisa Garr: So, well,
speaking of foods.
So you've given us a
chart here that we have
that we can take a look at and
it is a combination of you say
about 80 percent
alkaline-forming foods,
which you said are green foods.
Are they cooked or raw?
>> Donna Gates: Well, both.
Cooked, raw, and fermented.
They can be from the ocean.
They can be from the land.
I created this because
I got sick and tired
of having people say, "I
love the Body Ecology Diet.
It makes so much sense,
but it's so hard to do."
And I'm thinking,
"No, it isn't."
So I noticed that the U.S.
Government had this thing called
MyPlate and I thought, "Well,
this is not a very good MyPlate,
so I'm going to create an
OurPlate for all of us."
And so you'll notice that 80
percent of what's in green,
those are just alkaline-forming
foods and they're vegetables,
cooked, steamed, you
know, fermented, raw.
You want everything.
They're all good and
it's about balance.
And then ocean vegetables.
Like these green
ones, the ones I made,
they have wakame in them.
It's easy to mix.
>> Lisa Garr: You
mentioned that.
What is wakame?
>> Donna Gates: This
is just one of five
or six great sea vegetables
that you can incorporate
into salads and soups and all.
They give you a lot of
extra minerals in your diet.
Very alkalizing.
>> Lisa Garr: Green, leafy
- do you have kale in there?
>> Donna Gates: I did put
kale in this one, I think.
Sometimes I forget
how I make them.
But then the little orange part
of the pie chart is your animal
proteins, like eggs and fish
and chicken and beef,
and I encourage people
to find the foods that they tell
really work well in their body.
If fish is better for you,
don't eat beef, you know.
But if you have to have a
piece of beef every week
to feel strong and build
muscles, eat the beef,
because we're all
really different.
And then it's really
that simple.
And then you'll notice
little circles on the outside
that say - the oils
are really important.
Good, healthy oils.
And then dairy maybe.
Maybe. Some people thrive on
dairy and some people never do.
>> Lisa Garr: Well,
you've talked a lot
about the coconut kefir.
Now let's find out what it is.
What is coconut kefir?
This is one of my
favorite things
because this is really simple.
>> Donna Gates: It's
very magical.
Okay, so - and, also,
I have to tell you
that people think
I did this diet.
I didn't do this diet.
Some power has been helping me
put it together, even telling me
to put it together, forcing me
at times, sometimes even to go
to other parts of the world to
find someone or meet someone
or to get something
that's needed.
And, you know, it's amazing
really when I look back.
It all came together.
But this is another one of those
miracles that kind of got formed
because I wanted to help kids
with autism and I kept saying,
"I really want to help
kids with autism."
And then a series of what I call
divine arrangements occurred
and I learned from a man about
coconuts and I noticed everybody
out here in California was
drinking all this coconut water,
but I knew it was loaded with
sugar and that if people ate it,
they'd age really fast
and they'd be really sick
and they'd have candidiasis.
So one day I'm standing
in my kitchen
and this little voice kind of
idea in my head says, "Ferment."
I'm thinking that's too much
sugar in that coconut water.
It's not good for people.
And the voice says,
"Ferment the coconut water."
So I started fermenting it and
putting the good kefir starter,
which I was already teaching
people about milk kefir.
For people that can do milk,
they need to ferment it.
It's way better.
It's way better for
you than yogurt.
>> Lisa Garr: So the
bacteria eats the sugar?
>> Donna Gates: That's
their food source.
They break down the protein,
they digest the fats for you,
and they eat up the sugar.
So in milk there's
lactose, right?
And I was encouraging people
to make milk kefir and give it
to their kids and all
instead of regular milk.
Even babies at four months
can start having milk kefir.
But all the people in the world,
including autistic children
that can't have dairy, you
know, again, it was amazing
because when the
first mom called
with a little three-year-old, I
said - she lived in Charleston
and I thought, "She'll never
find coconuts in Charleston."
But she did.
She found them, she went home,
she started Thomas on these.
He's been well for
over 11 years now,
completely well for a long time.
We've helped hundreds
of children recover.
>> Lisa Garr: So
how do you make it?
>> Donna Gates: So
this is a magical food.
Because the autism community,
doctors and all and parents,
were finding out about this, it
spread all over very quickly.
In countries like
Australia, we've got lots
of doctors recommending
it for autism.
Okay, so you take
the coconut water,
which in this case is frozen
coconut water, and you want
to get coconut water
from Thailand
because it's the sweetest,
best for fermenting.
>> Lisa Garr: So you can get it
from a real Thai coconut or -
>> Donna Gates: In
the beginning,
that's all we had
was you had to break
up the coconut and pour it out.
Now the stores have the
coconuts open for you,
so you can buy three coconuts,
put it into a jar - well,
warm it first just to skin
temperature and then put it
in a jar and then
put your starter in.
Now, this - the only tricky
part of this is that you need
to keep it at a steady
temperature.
It's more sensitive
than the vegetables.
>> Lisa Garr: When you say
warm it, do you heat it or -
>> Donna Gates: Yeah, I
put it in a little saucepan
and actually what I do is
I stick my finger in it.
Wash my hands real well,
stick my finger in it,
and then when it's kind
of like skin temperature,
I know it's perfect.
So I'll then pour it in the
glass jar, like one of these,
and then I'll put
in the starter.
And then here's what I
do, I've learned to do,
is I have this little
heating pad.
It's actually really
a table warmer.
It's for the perfect
hostess that wants her dishes
to be hot when her guests come.
It's actually a plate warmer.
So she sticks all
her plates in there,
but it's like a really
long, skinny heating pad
that I ordered off the Internet.
So I just make this little
fence around my bottles
of coconut water and then it
can stay at a really steady -
other people have different
techniques and they put them
in their microwave
and underneath it.
They keep the light
on their microwave.
>> Lisa Garr: To
keep it warm, right.
>> Donna Gates: They have
different techniques,
but this is my latest technique.
And so what happens in
48 hours, it's fermented.
And it tastes very
champagne-y like.
People are crazy about it, but
if you've got a real picky child
with autism that are sensory -
you know, that have all kinds
of issues because their brain is
still not working right, they -
their moms put a little juice,
like cranberry, pomegranate,
acacia, a little bit of stevia,
and they just think it's juice.
But it is really, truly magical.
It starts healing the gut
and, again - oh, I didn't get
to say this, but it's
important to say.
We have - this whole
region of our body,
this abdominal area, is a brain.
A major, major brain.
And it's connected through this
big nerve, the vagus nerve,
to the brain in our head.
So you can just imagine that
when you've got problems here,
you've got problems here.
So now you have bacteria living
in there, good healthy bacteria.
They're talking to each other
and they really are amazing
at communicating and
helping each other grow.
One good bacteria
will secrete something
to make another one grow beside
it, and they're just amazing.
Sometimes they'll - some
will sacrifice themselves
for the good of the community
and it's really extraordinary
what they're doing inside of us.
But they're communicating
to the gut wall
and why are they doing that?
Well, they're telling the
brain important things.
And so you start healing the
gut with these fermented foods
and changes start
happening all over your body.
And it's a must for these kids.
It's a must for everybody.
We all have a gut, we all have
a brain, and we all have a body.
So this is a really
important missing link.
You know, if people would
get their yeast infections
under control, which they
will do with the diet -
>> Lisa Garr: You also talked
about the anti-aging aspects
of this and how correcting
the gut and the lining
of the gut communicates
to the cells
to reverse the aging process.
>> Donna Gates: Well
this isn't new.
I mean, Elie Metchnikoff
over a hundred years ago
said, "You know what?
When people eat fermented foods,
they seem to live a long time
and they seem to live well."
Like I don't have any pain
in my body and, you know,
and I'm actually sort
of surprised, you know,
that I'm holding up so well
because I do have a
busy, stressful life.
But Elie Metchnikoff,
he lived almost -
he way outlived his
normal lifespan.
He lived into his 70s and
people died in those days
in their mid-40s or so.
So he ate fermented foods,
too, so it's not new.
It's just new to us.
Actually, all over the world
where people eat fermented
foods, and they're everywhere.
People eat them and
their concept is,
"Oh, they're healthy.
They're good for you."
They don't know why
they're good for you.
And so I've tried
to bring the science
and now there's science
beyond my science.
In other words, now there's
this vast number of scientists
out there, microbiologists,
studying the way these
microbes relate to each other.
I call them sociologists,
microbiologists,
and explaining what they do and
what each individual one does,
and it's going to be -
it is literally bringing
about an entire revolution
in medicine.
Very, very exciting.
For those of us alive today,
with the advances in medicine
like this and SimCells and
understanding our cells,
which tell us specifically
you can't have saturated fats.
You can eat certain fats.
You know, the genes are going
to lead us to a lot of -
give us a lot of information
about what we can
and cannot eat.
>> Lisa Garr: You've
been a big passion -
you've had a huge passion for
anti aging and for the community
of people who don't need
to necessarily fall prey
to the normal ideas of aging.
>> Donna Gates: That's why I
wrote the Body Ecology Guide
to Growing Younger.
It's because we have,
just in the U.S. alone,
79 million Baby Boomers who,
in the next, most of them
in the next 10 to 15 years, are
going to be leaving the planet.
Twenty for sure.
But it doesn't have to
be that they suffer.
I mean, as a matter of fact, the
real new age is at least 105.
Who knows what our potential is.
But how are we going to
survive the next 15-20 years.
Let's say you die in 15 years.
With the Obamacare plan, you're
not going to get any help.
>> Lisa Garr: It's got
to get back to basics.
>> Donna Gates: We have
to take care of ourselves.
So this is urgent that people
that are aging, which happens
to be everybody, by the way,
understands how to reverse
and prevent aging and we have
the answers for that, too.
>> Lisa Garr: So we have a slide
that shows the seven universal
laws of what Body Ecology is
and that is a very
important point of what -
how to teach the
system of Body Ecology -
and one of them is the
principle of uniqueness
and then there's the
principle of balance.
There's the principle of acid
alkaline - I'm getting there.
And food combining,
which we talked about.
Well, we didn't actually
talk about that.
>> Donna Gates: And
the principle
of cleansing is really,
really important.
And combining, yeah.
Food combining, do you
want to talk about that?
>> Lisa Garr: Just real quickly.
We just have about
a minute left.
>> Donna Gates: Oh, dear.
>> Lisa Garr: I know,
it's a huge topic.
>> Donna Gates: Actually,
if we only have a minute,
all this is in the
book, you know,
and I've got so many websites.
Please go to the website
and join Facebook,
where we have a community, but
I would just like to tell people
that if you do three things
to add fermented foods
to your diet, only eat good
oils and get off the sugar
and use stevia instead,
you've made a huge step
on the right direction and
you will start getting well.
>> Lisa Garr: And
to also get all
of the gluten out of your diet.
>> Donna Gates: Gluten,
sugar, but also stress.
Sleep well.
Get your vitamin D levels
up and get the stress down
and you're good to go.
>> Lisa Garr: So
your basic message is
that all health begins
in the gut.
It has to do with
the immune system,
with the inner ecosystem, and,
of course, with the brain.
And it really helps
with all illness.
>> Donna Gates: If you have a
healthy gut, you're on your way
to an extremely healthy body.
It's not the only
thing you have to do.
Hopefully, people will
fix the gut and then go
on to the next step, but
if you have a bad gut,
then you really - you
have to fix that first.
First of all, you
have to fix the gut.
>> Lisa Garr: On your website,
you have a huge community
of people and all over
the Internet really now
since this has been a movement.
>> Donna Gates: Oh, yeah.
There's YouTube videos
and everything.
>> Lisa Garr: On how
to make the foods.
There's people to connect with
that have made different types
of recipes and experienced
them in different ways.
There's a huge community of
people that are practicing.
>> Donna Gates: Well, we know
at least tens of thousands.
We believe at least a
hundred thousand people
around the world.
We're not counting, but we've
sold over 350,000 copies
of the books and people
are learning this.
It's the future, really.
The more educated people
become, the more they're going
to realize this is all in a
tight package for them and,
if they don't feel overwhelmed
and just start doing it,
then go back and start learning
why does it work so well.
They'll be really excited.
That's what I think keeps
you committed to a program is
that you begin to
understand, "Oh,
this is why this works so well."
>> Lisa Garr: So you
start by feeling good
and then you go back
to figure out why.
>> Donna Gates: You
got to fix the brain.
The gut, the brain.
Lots of people aren't thinking
too well anymore and, oh,
my gosh, one in five children
has mental illness today
and we're - you know, they're
shooting people and everything.
It's not a gun problem; it's
a mental illness problem.
And, believe it or not,
gut and brain starts here.
Give me any one of those kids
- they usually end up dead
or something, sadly enough -
but I wish I could go back,
give them the right diet, and
we might not have the tragedy.
>> Lisa Garr: Well, you've got
a wonderful mission here that's
created an incredible
movement and I'm really glad
that you were on today.
So thank you so much
for being here.
>> Donna Gates: I'm
so grateful to be on.
I love it that you get
what I do and you can see
that we're both very
passionate about this.
Thank you for what you do, too.
>> Lisa Garr: A lot of info in
one hour, so thank you so much.
And if you want to watch
the replay of my show
with Donna Gates or if
you want to share it
with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
For a lot more thought-provoking
interviews
and wonderfully inspirational
films, go to gaiamtv.com.
Until next time, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[ Music ]